---
layout: post
title: Introducing Quineloop
---

h3. {{ page.title }}

p(meta). 14 Aug 2010

<div class="post_payload">

Quineloop ( http://blog.quineloop.com/ ) has been bootstrapped and is on slicehost! I choose slicehost since it offered the most afforadable and flexible GNU/Linux server. For $20 (about 900 INR appx) a month, I get to have a debian lenny server where I can try out all my web experiments. Not a bad deal at all, my monthly mobile bill also adds up to a similar amount! Utility computing at its best, I'd say!

This Blog is published using <a href="http://github.com/mojombo">Tom Preston-Werner's</a> "blog-aware, static site generator" named <a href="http://github.com/mojombo/jekyll">jekyll</a>. Unlike, traditional database driven blogging engines, with jekyll I use <a href="http://github.com/gautamc/quineloop_blog">github</a> and Capistrano to store and deploy my blog posts. Jekyll takes care of processing and transforming the textile and liquid templates into a static website that can be deployed under nginx.

Interstingly, jekyll provides ways to <a href="http://wiki.github.com/mojombo/jekyll/blog-migrations">migrate</a> existing WordPress, Movable Type, Typo 4+, TextPattern and Mephisto instance to their static site equivalents.

The workflow for adding a blog post looks something like this:
* $ cd ~/quineloop_blog/
* $ touch _posts/2010-08-14-introducing-quineloop.textile
* # Open _posts/2010-08-14-introducing-quineloop.textile in emacs and edit it
* $ jekyll
* # Open index.html and add the index entry for the new blog post
* $ jekyll --server
* # Check if everything looks as planned at: http://127.0.0.1:4000
* $ git add/commit/push
* $ cap deploy_blog # Reuqired only for the first time
* $ cap gen_blog # Required every time we want to edit/publish existing/new posts
* # http://blog.quineloop.com/ has the lastest blog post deployed!

</div>
