---
layout: post
title: gimp-image-get-layers - Using the Gimp to extract layers from a psd
---

h3. {{ page.title }}

p(meta). 17 Aug 2010

<div class="post_payload">

Time and again I've seen that programming on stuff for fun ends up teaching me intresting new things.

Up until now, I had been always hacking around with lisp only in the context of the emacs editor (since emacs has lisp interpreter that allows us to customize emacs).
Today, I figured I might as well put together some scheme code see how it feels. Since the Gimp is pretty much the "scheme supporting tool" that I have used most, I started looking for an API. Not suprisingly the API was not to difficult to find. It was right there in the Gimp.<a target="_blank" href="http://lh4.ggpht.com/_oYtjzHEnfk4/TGw-gf2CasI/AAAAAAAAAF4/qDW_vqd4808/s800/gimp_proc_browser.png">(File -> Xtns -> Procedure Browser)</a>. In fact, the gimp also provide a simple rep(read/execute/print) console where one can type in scheme lines of code and execute them (very similar to ruby's irb)

In the process of getting to know the gimp's I saw that it was pretty easy to extract out layers from an image. This function is understandably named: gimp-image-get-layers and takes an image object as its argument.

The coolest part is that function can be used to extract out the layers of a PSD. Hence, if I had a psd and wanted to pull out all the images in it while converting it into an CSS/XHTML file, I can use the gimp to do.

After some hacking around and going through the existing scripts in the gimp registry I discovered this <a href="/code/sg-save-all-layers.scm">script</a> for exactly the same task. 

<pre>
$ cd ~/.gimp-x.y/scripts
$ wget http://blog.trnscofi.in/code/sg-save-all-layers.scm .
$ gimp &
</pre>

You will see  the "File->Save all layers" menu item after you open a layered image!

</div>
