---
layout: post
title: Installing Yesod framework on Debian Squeeze.
---

h3. {{ page.title }}

p(meta). 01 July 2012

<div class="post_payload">

Haskell happens to be the coolest functional programming language around town :-p - and while learning OCaml I decided I wanted to learn and build something in Haskell.

"Yesod":http://www.yesodweb.com/page/quickstart is a web framework written in Haskell. Hence, I decided I will install and start experimenting with it. I noticed that that the Debian packages seem to provide an older version of Haskell (6.X) and this would not work for Yesod.

I got around this problem by following the step given below.
ghc is the Glasgow Haskell Compiler. cabal is the package mangement system  - kind of like ruby and gem. Yesod is distributed as a cabal package.

<pre>

$ wget http://www.haskell.org/ghc/dist/7.4.2/ghc-7.4.2-i386-unknown-linux.tar.bz2
$ tar -jxf ghc-7.4.2-i386-unknown-linux.tar.bz2
$ mkdir $HOME/ghc
$ ./configure --prefix=$HOME/ghc
$ make install

</pre>

Add $HOME/ghc to $PATH. I do this by adding it to my ~/.bashrc and then sourcing it - . ~/.bashrc )

<pre>

$ wget http://hackage.haskell.org/packages/archive/cabal-install/0.14.0/cabal-install-0.14.0.tar.gz
$ tar -zxf cabal-install-0.14.0.tar.gz
$ chmod 755 ./bootstrap.sh
$ ./bootstrap.sh

</pre>

Add $HOME/.cabal/bin to $PATH. I do this by adding it to my ~/.bashrc and then sourcing it - . ~/.bashrc )

<pre>

$ cabal update
$ cabal install yesod
$ yesod version
yesod-core version:1.1.0

</pre>

</div>
